---
title: "Thoughts on making and impact with technology"
createdAt: "2015-05-09"
categories: ["ramblings", "chartiy"]
summary: "'Tech isn't the solution but should never be the problem.'. "
---

There are many engineers and programmers out there (like myself) who love what they do but also have this niggling sense that all this stuff in our brains can be put to better use than building quirky apps and shopping websites. We look around the world and with almost any problem we can think of a handful of solutions that only require a bit silicon and some time mashing the keyboard. But a group of us recently got together and discussed the role of tech in addressing local and global issues. This discussion added some spice to thoughts that have been marinating in my mind for a long time.

I had recently read a story about an engineer who in the early 2000's kept bumping into a man that was sifting through the bins in his neighbourhood. The engineer soon befriended this man and discovered that he was looking for cans and bottles that he could trade in at the local recycling depot for money. As the engineer learnt more about his means of income he put his brain to work and developed a simple app on an old palm3 that logged the number of cans and bottles that the recycling guy collected at various addresses. This allowed the recycling guy to spend more time in neighbourhoods that tended to recycle more and increased his income by 30%.

When I read this story my immediate reaction was to praise the engineer identifying how tech can have a real impact on people’s lives. But these feelings were short lived. What the man did seemed so one off, unsustainable and unscalable. This is a lot of time and effort that this engineer put into helping one man do one thing. Scaling and mass impact are written into the genetic code of tech so surely the role of tech in addressing local and global issues must be on a larger scale.

The problem with tech however is that it is almost always in the hands of the wealthy. The people groups that need help are usually extremely impoverished and lack basic resources like food and security. They do not own iPhones and are not eyeing the iWatch. So any large-scale role that tech can have must be at a higher level.

A very promising role that tech can play in the lives of the vulnerable is helping the helpers. There are countless charities doing amazing work and restoring the lives of many broken people. These charities often lack the simple utility that tech can provide due to a lack of cash flow and overwhelming demand on their services. A simple thing like a well-designed and easy-to-use website could increase donations and volunteer participation. Well-designed apps can get rid of clipboards for ground workers and experienced data scientists can make inferences about large data sets that can dramatically improve efficiency, efficacy and general impact. These are areas that tech-loving people need to step into and volunteer their services because, it is very rare that a charity providing simple resources like drinking water will use their limited financial resources to improve their website or analyse their data.

The impact that these hard-working charities have will usually far out-weigh the impact of the tech giants (eg. Google, Facebook, Twitter) in addressing local and global issues. However, every now and then we see glimpses of what could be achieved if these giants got involved more regularly. The recent earthquake in Nepal woke the giants and resulted in an amazing financial and technological response. Leveraging the resources, community, talent and spending power of these companies is a very real role that tech can have in addressing local and global issues. Aside from helping charities or leveraging the tech giants, there are tools that can be built by individuals that can stand alone as a solution to a global or local issue. Code for America is an inspirational organization that have put together great minds from developers to designers to come up with simple ways of connecting people to their local government. They translate the hard-to-understand world of government for the man or woman on the street and as a small organization have had an amazing impact on the lives of many people.

As amazing as all these stories and possibilities are, there is a trap in all of them. I don't think tech should ever be seen as an end-to-end solution. Most of the problems in the world are not a result of a bad internet connection or corrupted data but rather a result of bad human connection and corrupted hearts. Therefore the solution will almost always involve reconciling man to man. This involves the work of humans talking, listening, loving, grieving, healing, caring, playing. This involves humans being humans to humans. It involves sharing, giving, receiving, celebrating, commiserating. The lack of tech would actually be helpful achieving this.

Tech isn't the solution but should never be the problem. For techy people there is a real temptation to see tech as the solution. These solutions are often driven by things far-removed from compassion like:

- Desire for an easy solution
- Desire for a one time catalytic investment
- Desire to see ingenuity triumph

A lack of human compassion will result in many tech solutions having an impact but never resulting in real change. Real change is only brought about when one group of people have human compassion for another group of people and use their skills to bring restoration. When a suffering group of people is seen as a solvable problem the solution will be shallow and will not withstand the beating that addressing global and local issues gives.

This brings me back to the engineer and the recycling man. Maybe that is the role of tech in addressing world issues. Sure, it wasn't scalable and definitely isn't sustainable but the role that tech played was merely as a vessel for the heart of one man to another. Tech wasn't the hero here, the man’s heart was. If tech can remain as the weapons in our hands as opposed to the whole army then I think we can win the war against injustice and poverty. So let’s wed tech to the people who have been fighting for a long time and see what change we can bring.
